From
the New York Times, I'm Michael Baro.
This is the daily.
[Music]
For the past decade, a simple message
has been delivered to a generation of
American students. If you learn to code
and get a computer science degree, then
you'll get a job with a six-figure
salary. But as my colleague Natasha
Singer found out, thousands of students
who followed that advice are discovering
that the promise was empty.
[Music]
It's Monday, September 29th.
>> Natasha
>> Michael,
>> thank you for coming back on the show.
>> Thanks for having me.
You Natasha came to us with a
counterintuitive observation which is
that at this moment that on paper seems
like a highly lucrative opportunity in
the world of tech because of the boom in
artificial intelligence.
This moment is turning out to be a bust
for those recent college grads trying to
get into the tech industry. That's
unexpected. It's completely unexpected.
We've seen over the last two years a
kind of remarkable spike in unemployment
among recent college grads seeking
software engineering and other tech
jobs.
>> And let me give you some numbers just to
illustrate that among recent college
grads aged 22 to 27, computer science
and computer engineering majors are
facing some of the highest unemployment
rates. 6.1% and 7.5 respectively
according to this new report from the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
>> And what does that compare with
everybody else?
>> That's more than twice the unemployment
rate among recent biology grads which is
just 3%.
>> College grads with tech backgrounds, the
lottery ticket, or so we thought in
American life are having a harder time
getting jobs than biology majors.
>> Right. And as a reporter who spent more
than a decade studying Silicon Valley's
influence on American education,
I can say that like the reduced job
prospects for computer science grads
this year represents a stunning
breakdown in the promise that tech
executives have made to millions of
American school kids over the last
decade. Well, just describe what exactly
was that promise and how did it filter
through the entire system?
>> Silicon Valley's promise to kids was if
you just work hard and learn to code,
computer programming will be your golden
ticket to a highpaying, high-powered,
high- status tech job, and you will be
more or less set for life. In the early
2010s,
we see tech leaders begin to publicly
warn that the US economic might and
global technology leadership is at risk
because not enough high schools are
teaching computer science and not enough
students were studying computer
programming.
>> I remember those warnings. They were
kind of explicit. Asia, in particular,
places like India, they were doing a
much better job of training their
future, their young people for this
industry than the US. We had to do
something about it,
>> right? It's urgent. The national
economic prowess and technology
leadership is at stake. And so, you see
tech company leaders like Eric Schmidt
at Google and Brad Smith at Microsoft
start saying that their companies are
creating new tech jobs faster than they
can find skilled workers to fill them.
And then the tech companies begin
lobbying members of Congress and state
lawmakers to support elevating the
status of computer science in schools,
funding more teacher training, getting
more curriculums.
>> Along the way, they're beginning to say,
"By the way, these are great jobs.
They're interesting jobs. They're
powerful jobs." And then in 2013, you
get Hadti Parti, who is a well-known
tech entrepreneur in Seattle, who had
started his career at Microsoft and then
became an investor in companies like
Uber and Dropbox. He comes along and he
starts a new nonprofit group called
Code.org to promote coding in schools.
And although it's an education
nonprofit, it acts very much like a
startup with viral marketing methods.
>> Like what? Well, the first thing they do
to promote coding in schools is code.org
made a video in 2013.
>> I was 13 when I first got access to a a
computer
>> starring the biggest tech titans of them
all, including Bill Gates and Mark
Zuckerberg.
>> I was in sixth grade. It just started
off because I wanted to do this one
simple thing. I wanted to make something
that was fun for myself and and my
sisters.
>> And it opens with them talking about how
they got started learning to code. I
wrote this little program and then
basically just add a little bit to it.
And then when I need to learn something
new, I looked it up either on the
internet.
>> You have these powerful billionaires
making this pitch that anyone actually
can learn to code. Any kid,
>> whether you're trying to make a lot of
money or whether you just want to change
the world, computer programming is
incredibly empowering skill to learn.
These are our heroic innovators and
they're rich and they've achieved the
American dream and they're telling every
kid in America, you could be us if you
just learn to code and by the way we'll
hire you.
>> Like what's better than that?
>> The programmers of tomorrow are the
wizards of the future. You know, you're
going to look like you have magic powers
compared to everybody else.
>> I think it's amazing. It's I think it's
the closest thing we have to a
superpower. And how much does this
actually infiltrate maybe sounds like
too aggressive a word but become
institutionalized in schools during this
period?
>> You know the video was very influential.
Millions of people saw this video in the
first couple of weeks. And I think it
also you know just the idea that coding
is you give computers an instruction of
what to do in many families with school
age kids. This video helped coding
become a household word.
Hi, I'm Leia. And I'm Tanya.
>> And we're lucky enough to be studying
computer science. And then later that
year, code.org launches another thing
called Hour of Code.
>> How do you get him to get to the
Sunflower? He needs to do some actions.
>> I got it.
>> And that was an annual event in schools
where millions of kids simultaneously
did these hourlong coding tutorials.
>> She coded this. Look at all that code.
Look at all that stuff going on. ready
to go. Go.org.
>> And that was also widely influential
because it was fun, it was easy, and
your whole school could do it at once.
And you know, since that launch in 2012,
code.org says that kids have done these
lessons or started them anyway hundreds
of millions of times.
>> I just got a award for completing a hour
of code and it says, and this is for
Minecraft and this is from Microsoft.
Here you guys go.
What happened after the video and the
hour of code or as these things are
happening was companies like Microsoft
and Google together with code.org and
dozens of national and local nonprofit
groups across the country began an
effort to scale computer science in
schools and they used different methods.
One was they did lobby from state to
state and get laws passed to elevate the
status of computer science. Instead of
like making an elective, it's now a core
science course. They got money and they
started programs to train thousands of
more teachers to teach computer science.
Wow. And they launched new curriculums
in schools. You see, for example, in
2016, the college board launched a new
advanced placement course that was
funded by the National Science
Foundation and it was called computer
science principles. It was made to
broaden the audience of kids who could
participate in computer science and it
has been wildly successful in terms of
getting a huge number of kids to take
this introductory on-ramp to computer
science and just get a taste of what it
means. And so, Natasha, as all of this
focus on coding, basically coding mania
settles over America and American
education, how well-kept is the promise
in this period? How well is it working
out for the students who are going
through it and the companies who are
promoting it? I think both the massive
marketing and the increased availability
of computer science in high schools
helped spur a massive influx of kids to
get into computer science. And we can
see from the data last year the number
of undergraduates majoring in computer
science in the United States topped
170,000 students. Mhm.
>> And that is essentially triple the
number of students majoring in computer
science since 2012.
>> It worked.
>> It worked. I mean, getting more kids to
care about this, be interested in this,
want to major in it, consider careers in
this really, really worked.
>> Mhm. And for certain kids who followed
the pipeline through AP computer science
and graduated from some of the elite
schools that tech companies like to hire
from, they did end up with these golden
ticket jobs doing interesting work on
high-profile software and making a lot
of money, much more than humanities
majors who were starting out with hourly
jobs.
>> Okay. So, how do we go from these
companies telling everyone there's a
golden ticket to a lot of kids going out
and seeking the education that would
give them the golden ticket to this
moment that numerically you described it
at the beginning of our conversation
where so many computer science students
can't seem to find a job and are doing
worse than their classmates. How did
that happen?
>> So, there's a confluence of factors.
First of all, it turns out that some of
the same big tech companies who pushed
schools to teach computer science and
told kids coding was magic
>> are very picky about who they hire.
>> And many of the young students who
studied programming or software
development really had no shot working
at big tech firms.
>> Why not? Because the hiring process at
some companies has long skewed to kids
who are already advantaged to begin
with. Like some of the hiring criteria,
you have to pass these coding tests.
They're looking for students who have
done side coding projects and built
their own software. And some of those
criteria are more easily met by middle
and upper class students who have money
and time than lower income students who
have to work full-time jobs during
school. M
>> and so it has always been hard for
certain students to get hired by big
tech companies. So that's one of the
major factors. Other factors that have
come up more recently is that tech
companies overhire during the pandemic
and now some are shedding jobs. We also
saw that some of the big tech companies
over the last couple of years like
Amazon and Microsoft have increased the
number of foreign workers they hired
because they can be paid less in some
cases than Americans. And recently the
Trump administration actually tried to
limit the visas that go to these workers
in part to address this.
>> Right. This is the recent policy to
increase the cost of what are known as
H1B visas.
>> Exactly. So there's the visa issue
already and then AI comes along and that
changes a number of things. First of
all, big tech companies have changed
priorities. They want to invest more in
building these huge data centers that
they need to run AI services and that
means less is going to go to humans on
the workforce, right?
>> So they're cutting back on that. And
then the AI itself is beginning to
replace workers. We saw Salesforce
announce, you know, they're laying off
thousands of customer service workers
because AI can do some of those jobs.
But also in software engineering itself,
>> right? AI literally codes.
>> Yeah. I went to visit Anthropic when I
was in San Francisco. You know, they
make the AI tool cla and they have
claude code, you know, which generates
code. And you know they were talking
about everybody coming to terms with the
fact that being a software engineer is
changing
>> and that producing the code yourself is
no longer the backbone of some of these
jobs. And you know that is a particular
hardship for kids who've just spent the
last decade learning how to master
computer programming. And so what
exactly happens to the tens and I guess
almost hundreds of thousands of kids who
have built their entire academic lives
around preparing for a market that for
all the reasons you just described has
shrunk and may not exist for them
anymore. So, as part of my reporting on
this, we asked recent computer science
grads around the country to share their
experiences with us.
>> And we heard from more than a hundred
recent college computer science grads.
And I'm just going to read you some of
their responses.
>> They said, "It's extremely discouraging.
It's incredibly frustrating. It is soulc
crushing. It seems like my degree
doesn't matter. Some of my skills are
now worthless. It's too demoralizing.
>> They're having a really rough go of it.
>> Some students told us that while they're
looking for tech jobs, some of them are
applying for fast food jobs at Chipotle.
One student was working as a clerk at
Walgreens. It's not the kind of job they
envisioned when they were told if they
just learned to code they get six figure
jobs,
>> right? That's not the golden ticket.
>> It's no longer the golden ticket. It's
the tarnish ticket.
And some of these students ended up
moving back home, rich in degrees, poor
in employment. And when I called them,
they were applying for jobs out of their
childhood bedrooms.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Natasha, tell us the story of one of
these recent college grads majoring in
computer science whose visions of a
career in tech have been challenged by
the new reality of the industry.
>> So, I'm from Sugar Falls, Ohio, up near
Cleveland Northeast. One of the recent
grads I spoke with whose story really
resonated for me is named Nathan Spencer
and he's 22 and he grew up in a small
town outside of Cleveland.
>> Let's see. I probably first encountered
a computer through those big boxy family
computers probably when I was in middle
school
>> and he enters school just as this coding
careers promise is becoming entrenched
in American popular culture and
education.
>> Everybody is on computers. I mean, we we
were introduced to like the Google Suite
and like writing on a computer like in
fifth grade and middle school. Um,
>> and he talked about watching some of the
videos we talked about earlier and the
hour of code and learning coding basics
in middle school.
>> Yeah. Probably first experience block
coding. Yeah.
>> And as he enters high school, his
interest and his learning in computer
science deepens.
>> The AP course I took, a lot of that was
focused on games. We made mind sweeper.
We collaboratively as a class made like
a dungeon crawler board game. I made
Tetris for my final project.
>> And as a high school senior, he takes an
AP computer science class and it ends up
being a really formative experience. He
said he had a really great teacher who
taught him a lot. I think that's that's
kind of where that interest sparked was
we'd make a game and then it my teacher
would drop something like oh like did
you know that everything that you're
working with is actually just stored in
like a binary code and everything's just
on and off and it's all just electrical
switches.
>> But along the way he discovers he loves
programming. He loves being able to make
stuff with code. It's not just the
promise of money. It's the promise of
making stuff. H it really does feel like
he is a true product of the world that
these tech company leaders created
within American education,
>> right? He seems like he is the ideal
person for the pipeline that the tech
industry is building.
>> Mhm. So then he goes to college at Ohio
State
>> and I I kind of thought back in that
moment to how much I enjoyed
programming, how much I enjoyed creating
on a computer and I was like, "Okay,
I'll I'll pivot to computer science."
>> And after a brief moment as a math
major, he decides to switch to the field
that he loves, computer science.
>> Mhm. And as you switched from math to
computer science, how did you think
about the potential career skills and
job prospects?
>> I mean, honestly, at the time, this
would have been fall of 2021. Um, I
thought nothing of it. I thought, I
mean, I've been told my whole life that
computer science is a good place to be
in. I mean, math as well, but computer
science always felt stable to me. Um,
so yeah, at at the time that was my
mentality
>> and he does really really well.
Sumakumloud, he's on the deans list.
He's worked as a teaching assistant for
the more basic computer science courses.
He did all the right things. And yet, as
he starts applying to internships,
reality hits that in fact, coding is not
going to magically produce a host of job
options. Starting fall of 2023, I
believe I applied to 90 positions before
that summer of 2024.
Probably got I think three or four
interviews and no no offers.
>> Wait, sorry. Can I just interject for a
minute here?
>> In the fall of 2023,
you applied to 90 different internship
programs for the next summer in tech.
You got correct a couple of interviews
but no internship offers.
>> Correct.
>> What kind of companies were you applying
to?
>> This was anything in Columbus,
Cleveland, Pittsburgh, anything around
kind of Midwest area. Probably midsize.
I'd say
>> the math he describes to you is almost
comically cruel that he doesn't get a
single internship
>> from 90 applications.
>> Right. The thing that's striking is many
students I spoke to applied to 90
hundreds maybe even thousands of jobs
and didn't get a single offer and
neither does Nathan.
>> Yeah. So I mean the cycle began again. I
think I did a little less. I think I hit
70 71 applications during senior year
interviews for about three or four.
>> But this year he actually does get one
offer for a summer internship.
>> It's application development. So, it's
what I've been looking for for the past
four years. Um,
>> and after graduating college in May, he
gets this internship at a Ohio state
government agency where he's developing
apps.
>> Mhm.
>> But he does not have a full-time job
offer.
>> This whole time, I've been applying to
jobs over the summer. So, it's just
Yeah, it's just really frustrating. I'm
curious how Nathan sees this gap that we
have been talking about this entire
episode between what kids like him were
told about programming and coding and
the reality of his situation today.
>> You know, I asked him about it and he
had a very nuanced view.
>> Yeah, I think it was jobs will be
plentiful. I won't run into crazy
monetary risks and also I'll get to
create what I want. I think that was a
big draw to
>> you know he did not expect to instantly
move out to Silicon Valley and land a
big tech job and make a lot of money.
>> I think when you tell every young person
for several years computer science is
the place to be, they start to believe
that and then all of a sudden everybody
has a computer science degree. So, it's
it's very difficult to feel like you're
competing against this mass quantity of
people and also feel like you don't have
a way to make yourself stand out.
>> At least for the moment, he feels like
too many kids bought the tech industry
marketing and decided to major in
computer science. And his view is that
the supply of student or recent grad
programmers is now exceeding industry
demand. Basically, he believes too many
people did what he did,
>> right?
>> And now there's a glut.
>> That's what he thinks.
>> How much blame does he put on AI for
what's happening?
>> Nathan says he's very concerned about
it. I mean, the fact that entry level
and junior level positions are
effectively being eliminated because
companies are deciding that AI can do
that work instead, that's just that
boggles my mind because how are you
going to have senior developers if you
get rid of all the junior developers? I
guess
>> his view is that AI is going to
increasingly
be used to code and displace entrylevel
software engineers and junior
programmers. And it wasn't just the
money. He wanted to be a builder, which
is what the tech industry wants. M
>> and he was very wistful that now the AIs
are going to be the creators and humans
are just going to be essentially the
handmaidadens that steer AI coding and
then check whether the AI code that was
produced is correct. And you know that's
like training a whole generation of kids
to be chefs to cook from scratch and
then saying to them okay you're going to
just be in charge of cake mixes from now
on.
>> Mhm. Does he think that there is a
career in tech for him?
>> You know, he is really interested in
being a designer.
>> I've been investigating switching out of
this field
>> and he's thinking about if he cannot
design software, what other careers are
there where he could design things and
that would be meaningful for him. I took
some really, really great architecture
classes in undergrad.
>> And so he's thinking about maybe going
to graduate school in architecture so
that he can build things, which is the
thing that he feels he's good at, he's
talented, and he cares about.
>> And I I think it might be a good time to
pick up a secondary skill, whether
that's through grad school program or
even just starting an internship in a
completely different field.
As disheartening as Nathan's experience
clearly is, I just want to level set for
a minute with you, Natasha.
Nathan and those like him clearly came
along at a time when
computer science transitioned into
artificial intelligence
before
they had a chance to really know that
was going to happen and to train for it.
Right? there's no AP AI class. So I
guess what I'm asking is is this a
temporary problem? One that can over
time be addressed by the education
system. So I think the answer is both
yes and no.
I think that computer science majors who
graduated this year and last year are
going to have a particularly hard time
because many of them have not yet
learned to use the AI coding tools that
big tech companies now want software
developers and software engineers to
use. So it's certainly conceivable that
5 years from now when college computer
science departments are teaching kids
both the fundamentals of computer
programming and then how to use these
new coding tools that computer science
majors will be much more employable.
But I also think in the long term it's
really hard to know.
>> And so Natasha I wonder what you think
the big lesson of this story is. I mean,
superficially perhaps one observation I
take is that tech moves a whole lot
faster than our education system. And so
there's inevitably going to be a
mismatch here if tech folks tell schools
to prepare kids and then tech just
changes and those kids are prepared for
a market that no longer exists.
>> I think that this is completely true and
also I think it's sort of the moral of
the story. I'm working on a book right
now about the decadel long push for
computer science and now AI in schools.
And one of the things I've learned from
doing historical research is that this
is a pattern of the tech industry of
pushing school reforms. And it's always
the latest hyped thing that's urgent for
schools to teach and schools respond.
And we want schools to respond because
we want kids to be able to use the
technology of the day and we want kids
to be able to learn the subjects that
are the most important of the day and
that help them navigate their worlds and
get jobs.
>> But at the same time, tech companies
have outsiz influence in schools. And we
have bowed to tech industry education
agendas in school without a lot of
public discussion or independent
scrutiny. And if you think about other
industries, we don't let big pharma
companies like Fizer or Johnson and
Johnson tell high schools what to teach
in biology,
>> right? You're saying tech has a unique
purchase on American education.
>> Tech companies supply the laptops, the
software, the email, the writing apps,
the PowerPoint apps, right? They supply
the platforms on which schools run. And
it gives them a unique power to then
say, "We are the backbone of schools. We
are at the forefront innovation." And so
we're going to tell you what kids need
to learn. No other industry occupies
that kind of powerful influence in
schools.
[Music]
And I'm reporting on how some of the
same tech companies that pushed for
computer science are now pivoting from
coding to pushing for AI education and
AI tools in schools. And we see
Microsoft just announced an effort to
provide 4 billion in AI technology and
training to skill students in schools
and community colleges with AI. Google
just announced a $1 billion commitment
for a similar AI education effort. And
the crisis rhetoric is similar to the
coding crusade, right? The country needs
more skilled AI workers to stay
competitive and kids who learn to use AI
will get better job opportunities.
>> H So it's 2010 all over again.
>> Exactly. So I think we have the
opportunity now to proceed more
deliberately and think more clearly
about what are the things that are most
important for kids to learn and not so
much what's best for tech companies.
[Music]
>> Well Natasha, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thanks Michael. Always great to be with
you.
[Music]
Natasha Singer is writing a book about
all of this. It's called Coding Kids:
Big Tech Battle to Remake Public
Schools, and it will be published next
fall. We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Over the weekend, President Trump
ordered that federal troops be sent to
Portland, Oregon to quell small protests
there directed at a US immigration and
customs enforcement facility. The move
has been opposed by the state's
governor, Democrat Tina Cotek, who said
that she had told both the president and
his secretary of homeland security to
stay out of the city.
>> There is no insurrection. There is no
threat to national security and there is
no need for military troops in our major
city. Military service members should be
dedicated to real emergencies.
The protests against an ICE office in
Portland have occurred for several
months, rarely attracting more than two
dozen demonstrators and have included
brief skirmishes between protesters and
police, some of them involving tear gas.
Meanwhile, ICE has arrested the
superintendent of the public school
system in De Moine, Iowa, Ian Roberts,
claiming that Roberts has been in the US
illegally for years and had ignored a
pre-existing deportation order. After
his arrest, De Moines's school board
said it was unaware of Robert's legal
status and quickly voted to put him on
leave.
Finally, New York City's Mayor Eric
Adams is ending his bleaguered campaign
for re-election just 5 weeks before
election day. In a video, he
acknowledged that his indictment on
federal corruption charges last year,
charges that President Trump later
dropped had hurt his image with voters.
Recent polls showed Adams in fourth
place in the race, winning just 7% of
the vote, which will be held on November
4th.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Win, Ricky Netski, Michael Simon
Johnson, and Mary Wilson. It was edited
by Mark George and Patricia Willins.
contains music from Marian Lozano and
Dan Powell and was engineered by Chris
Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the day. I'm Michael Boro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]